---
title: "How to Run"
subtitle: "(more or less correctly)"
date: 2023-02-28
---

# Who this is for
This article is for people who are just beginning to run, wanting to get into running, or people who want to learn about "correct" running practices. Note: all of the following contain my personal opinion. There is no perfect way to do anything, and every body is different.

# Gear
To get started running, you need one of two things: Grass (preferable) or running shoes. The best way to start running is barefoot on grass, as it requires and builds good form. If you live in a place where you don't have a football field or a grassy park, getting running shoes is a top requirement. The interesting thing about shoes is that unless you are a heavy runner, getting expensive and cushioned shoes will not help you in the long run (😏). Commonly, novice runners will try running and think they need shoes with loads of cushion and support (Hoka specifically). While this might sound attractive, and will feel oh-so comfortable in the shoe store, it's not going to help you be a better runner and [multiple](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35993829/) [studies](https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/document?repid=rep1&type=pdf&doi=a94869c9eae482e181f9c40df611c5f92e33dd8f) show how running shoes don't even really help with injury. How you *do* become a better runner I will describe in the next section.

# Stride and form
A lot of running coaches, YouTubers, and online running websites will tell you that there is a perfect running form that you should be doing and imitating popular runners' forms. [Articles like this](https://www.roadrunnersports.com/blog/proper-running-form) disturb me to no end, as they make it seem like there's only one proper way to run. While being mindful of yourself is healthy, different people will have varying natural strides that are most efficient for their individual bodies. However, one thing that is paramount to preventing injury is your foot strike, which is the area on your foot that you hit the ground with first. Running barefoot, your body will automatically pick up on this and you'll probably automatically switch to run on your midfoot or forefoot. Many new runners quit within a month just because of the knee injury, which proper foot strike prevents. As I've said earlier, running form is important, but if you run barefoot on grass to start, your body will naturally pick up the most efficient stride for you, including foot strike.

# Recovery and icing
After you run for the first time, hopefully barefoot on grass, your muscles WILL feel sore. If you're not used to running, your calves will feel like planks for the next couple of days. But no fear, this is a good thing! If your tendons or muscles are sore, it means that they were used, and will be strengthened for the next time you run! Feeling soreness on your calves, Achilles tendons, and other leg muscles is ideal; what you don't want to feel is pain on a joint or bone like your knees or shins. A common thing for competitive runners to do is to use ice to relieve pain on muscles. While it certainly does do this, [newer science](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/21/well/move/exercise-icing-sore-muscles.html) says that it might not be good for you. This is too much of a new controversy to say definitively, but I personally stay away from icing in the hopes that my muscles will recover faster.

# Run slow to run fast
Just because you *can* go fast doesn't mean that you *should* go fast. This is a core part of Kenyan running philosophy, and it means that you need to have a strong aerobic base to be able to run at a higher tempo. When, how hard, and for how long you should be training is important to how quickly you can improve. There are three general categories of training, and these are Low Aerobic, High Aerobic, and Anaerobic. Low Aerobic is basically running with your mouth closed, High Aerobic is running with your mouth open, and Anaerobic is sprinting. Unless you are a sprinter, the main categories to focus on are Low and High Aerobic. As a new runner, any running that you do will be useful, but as you get more experienced, it's important to have a balance between the two.

# Running culture
Getting started in a new sport or hobby is always daunting, and it can sometimes feel like you don't know anything at all. The nice thing is, the majority of runners are too high on endorphins to be intimidating, and the percentage of judgemental runners is pretty small. There are a couple of helpful and encouraging online communities, and the [r/Running](https://www.reddit.com/r/running/) subreddit is a good place to start.

# Have fun
Of course, if you're trying to make running a new habit, you aren't going to be able to do it if you're not having fun. Running is all about getting natural exercise in an exhilarating way, and there are a couple things that you can do to ensure your motivation.
1. Run with somebody: running is fun by yourself, but it's so much more fun with someone else! Find someone to regularly run with you, and it will be so much more enjoyable. I'm on my high school cross country team, so I am almost always running with a friend.
2. Go slow: running doesn't have to be an enjoyable thing where you are always panting and struggling up a hill. When you are just starting to run, the first two weeks will probably be very difficult, and after that your body will get used to the load, and it can really start to be fun! Just remember to vary the length and intensity of your runs to spread training focus.
